k-means clustering is a simple yet
effective algorithm for
cluster analysis that is
commonly used in practice.
After this video,
you will be able to describe
the steps in the k-means algorithm,
explain what the k stands for in k-means
and define what a cluster centroid is.
Recall a cluster analysis divides samples
in a data set into groups or clusters.
The idea is to group similar items in
the same cluster, where similar is defined
by some metric that measures
similarity between data samples.
So the goal of cluster analysis
is to divide data sample
such that sample within a cluster
are as close together as possible.
And samples from different clusters
are as far apart as possible.
k-means is a classic algorithm used for
cluster analysis.
The algorithm is very simple.
The first step is to select
k initial centroids.
A centroid is simply the center of
a cluster, as you see in the diagram here.
Next, assign each sample in
a dataset to the closest centroid.
This means you calculate
the distance between the sample and
each cluster center and assign a sample
to the cluster with the closest centroid.
Then you calculate the mean,
or average, of each cluster
to determine a new centroid.
These two steps are then repeated until
some stopping criterion are reached.
Here's an illustration
of how k-Means works.
(a) shows the original data
set with some samples.
And (b) illustrates centroids
initially selected.
(c) shows the first iteration.
Here, samples are assigned
to the closest centroid.
In (d), the centroids are recalculated.
(e) shows the second iteration.
Samples are assigned to
the closer centroid.
Note that some samples changed
their cluster assignments.
And in (f),
the centroids are recalculated again.
Cluster assignments and
centroid calculations are repeated until
some stopping criteria is reached.
And you get your final clusters,
as shown in (f).
How are the initial centroids selected?
The issue is that the final
cluster results are sensitive
to initial centroids.
This means that cluster results with
one set of initial centroids can be
very different from results with
another set of initial centroids.
There are many approaches to
selecting the initial centroids for
k-means varying in levels
of sophistication.
The easiest and most widely used approach
is to apply k-means several times
with different initial centroids
randomly chosen to cluster you dataset.
And then select the centroids that
give the best clustering results.
To evaluate the cluster results,
an error measure,
known as the within cluster sum
of squared error, can be used.
The error associated with a sample
within a cluster is the distance between
the sample and the cluster centroid.
The squared error of the sample then,
is the squared of that distance.
We sum up all the squared errors for
all samples for
a cluster to the get the squared error for
that cluster.
We then do the same thing for all
clusters to get the final calculation for
the within-cluster sum
of squared error for
all clusters in the results
of a cluster analysis run.
Given two clustering results, the one with
the smaller within-cluster sum of squared
error, or WSSE for short,
provides the better solution numerically.
However, as we've discussed before,
there is no ground truth
to mathematically determine which set of
clusters is more correct than the other.
In addition, note that increasing
the number of clusters,
that is, increasing the value for
k, always reduces WSSE.
So WSSE should be used with caution.
It only makes sense to use WSSE
to compare two sets of clusters
with the same value for k and
generate it from the same dataset.
Also the set of clusters with
the smallest WSSE may not
always be the best solution for
the application at hand.
Again, interpretation and
domain knowledge about what the cluster
should represent and how they will be used
are crucial in determining
which cluster results are best.
Now that there are several metrics that are
used to evaluate cluster results as well.
Choosing the optimal value for k is
always a big question in using k-means.
There are several methods to
determine the value for k.
We will discuss a few here.
Visualization techniques can be used
to determine the dataset to see if
there are natural
groupings of the samples.
Scatter plots and
the use of dimensionality reduction
are useful here, to visualize the data.
A good value for
k is application-dependent.
So domain knowledge of the application can
drive the selection for the value of k.
For example,
if you want to cluster the types of
products customers are purchasing,
a natural choice for k might be the number
of product categories that you offer.
Or k might be selected to represent the
geographical locations of respondents to
a survey.
In which case, a good value for
k would be the number of regions
your interested in analyzing.
There are also data-driven method for
determining the value of k.
These methods calculate symmetric for
different values of k to determine
the best selections of k.
One such method is the elbow method.
The elbow method for determining
the value of k is shown on this plot.
As we saw in the previous slide,
WSSE, or within-cluster sum of
squared error, measures how much
data samples deviate from their respective
centroids in a set of clustering results.
If we plot WSSE for different values for
k, we can see how this
error measure changes as a value
of k changes as seen in the plot.
The bend in this error curve indicates
a drop in gain by adding more clusters.
So this elbow in the curve provides
a suggestion for a good value of k.
Note that the elbow can not always be
unambiguously determined, especially for
complex data.
And in many cases, the error curve
will not have a clear suggestion for
one value, but for multiple values.
This can be used as a guideline for
the range of values to try for k.
We've discussed choosing
the initial centroids and
looked at ways to select a value for
k, the number of clusters.
Let's now look at when to stop.
How do you know when to stop
iterating when using k-means?
One obviously stopping criterion is when
there are no changes to the centroids.
This means that no samples would
change cluster assignments.
And recalculating the centroids
will not result in any changes.
So additional iterations will
not bring about any more changes
to the cluster results.
The stopping criterion can be relaxed to
the second stopping criterion listed here.
Which is when the number of
sample changing clusters is below
a certain threshold, say 1% for example.
At this point, the clusters
are changing by only a few samples,
resulting in only minimal changes
to the final cluster results.
So the algorithm can be stopped here.
At the end of k-means we have a set
of clusters, each with a centroid.
Each centroid is the mean of
the samples assigned to that cluster.
You can think of the centroid as
a representative sample for that cluster.
So to interpret the cluster
analysis results,
we can examine the cluster centroids.
Comparing the values of the variables
between the centroids will reveal
how different or alike clusters are and
provide insights into what
each cluster represents.
For example, if the value for age is
different for different customer clusters,
this indicates that the clusters
are encoding different
customer segments by age,
among other variables.
In summary, k-means is a classic algorithm
for performing cluster analysis.
It is an algorithm that is simple
to understand and implement, and
is also efficient.
The value of k, the number of clusters,
must be specified.
And final clusters are sensitive
to initial centroids.